The contents of this app are provided for educational purposes only and are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease or health condition. The information provided should not be considered as a substitute for the advice of a medical doctor or other healthcare professional.
What is Depression?
Depression is a mental disorder that can affect individuals of any age.
Unlike grief, persons diagnosed with depression experience a persistent and constant feeling of loss and sadness. They are unable to enjoy anything and may not see anything positive regarding the future.
Depression is described by doctors based on the level of severity. One may be diagnosed with mild depression, moderate depression, or severe depression.
The impact of mild depression to one’s daily life is less compared to the other forms of depression. 
Moderate depression poses a significant impact to the daily life of an individual diagnosed with it. Its impact is greater than that of mild depression. 
Persons diagnosed with severe depression on the other hand face a lot of difficulties carrying on with their daily lives. Persons with severe depression may show psychotic symptoms.
Depression Symptoms
Symptoms of depression affect an individual’s feelings, behaviour, thoughts, and physical manifestation.
Persons who suffer depression show feelings of sadness, unhappiness, emptiness, angry outbursts, irritability, and frustrations over petty issues. 
Sometimes the depressed person shows lack of interest in normal activities, and fails to find pleasure in what others find immense pleasure. 
A number of people diagnosed with depression showed lack of appetite and weight loss was also reported.
Other symptoms include anxiety, restlessness, and inability to concentrate or complete a task.
Depression Causes
Various forms of abuse including past sexual, physical, or emotional abuse could be the cause for depression in the later life of an individual. 
Certain medications including Accutane which is used as a treatment for acne can heighten an individual’s risk of depression. Other known drugs capable of compounding the risk depression are corticosteroids and interferon-alpha.
A number of cases of depression have been linked to individual conflicts and disputes involving friends and family members. Such personal conflicts are a major cause of depression especially for persons who are biologically vulnerable to depression.
Sadness or any other form of grief associated with loss of a family member, friend, or any other relative is known to increase the risk of depression. 
Divorcing, marrying the love of your life, changing jobs, travelling, losing a job, getting a job, retiring, and any other major event in one’s life could lead to depression.
Depression Treatment
The most prominent treatment approaches for depression include antidepressant therapy, psychotherapy, and lifestyle changes. However, women are accorded special treatment considerations because of the biological differences between men and women. 
Psychological treatments (talking therapies) turns around the negative thinking patterns of people diagnosed with depression. This form of treatment aims at improving an individual’s capacity to cope and deal with conflicts and other forms of life’s stresses. 
Cognitive behaviour therapy, often known as CBT, helps recognise an individual’s way of thinking (also known as cognition) and how he or she acts (behaviour) and how the two impact one’s feelings.
Antidepressant medication is considered the main medical treatment for persons diagnosed with depression. It is a common treatment option where other forms of treatment have failed or where the severity of the illness is beyond psychological treatment.
Severe forms of depression such as psychosis and bipolar disorder are generally treated with medication. Such medication employs a combination of antidepressants, anti-psychotic drugs, and mood stabilisers.
Want to know more about Depression? Go back and UNLOCK complete information on Symptoms, Treatment, Causes, Diagnosis, Prevention, Statistics and Facts. UNLOCK and get NEW Depression Health Tips with every update, stay informed!